
OHF (Member) asked a question.

April 22, 2025 at 7:34 PM
Courtesy bug report: Create and Package IP generates non-compliant AXI4-Lite vhdl
Previously, I reported Xilinx coding guideline violations and other style issues with the Vivado 2024.2 generated VHDL via the create and package IP tool for an AXI4-Lite interface.

 

In that post, @dgisselq (Member)​ reported that not only was there the problems I identified, but the generated code wasn't even compliant with the AMBA AXI4-Lite standard.

 

Upon review of the code, I concurred that the problem exists, but it was based only on a review of the code.

 

I also confirmed, for myself at least, via code review, that the AXI4-Lite generated code produced by 2022.2 did not have that problem.

 

Well, I had a little time, and nobody from AMD chimed in on that post 😔...

 

So I did some testing using my own testbench and the AXI protocol checker.

 

My code and the AXI4-lite protocol checker both confirmed that the code generated by 2022.2 passes all checks.

 

However, the 2024.2, while passing the AXI protocol checker checks, failed mine.

 

Here is the failure:

 

capipgencodebug 

In this waveform, using 2024.2 generated VHDL, the point in A3.3 is put to the test in 2024.2, viz, data appears before the address. In this case, the slave never generates a write response (BRSP/bvalid), though it did generate the readys for the write data and write address channels .

 

This is in contrast to the 2022.2 version of the generated AXI4-Lite code, which handled this situation by taking advantage of A3.3.1 write transaction dependency clauses, viz., "the slave can wait for AWVALID or WVALID, or both, before asserting AWREADY" and "the slave can wait for AWVALID or WVALID, or both, before asserting WREADY."

 

Incidentally, I did my own AXI4-Lite and ran it through the AXI protocol checker and my own checker that passes. I take a different approach than @dgisselq (Member)​ did on his blog. I do not care about throughput on an AXI4-Lite interface, e.g., the ability of keeping all three write channels active on every clock with the relevant VALIDS and READYs. If I cared about that, I would use AXI4-full.

 

In the context of an AXI4-Lite interface, which I typically use for status, control, coefficient loading, and the like, I care about making timing and being able to be clocked at arbitrarily high clock rates so I can reduce clock domain crossings.

 

Putting backpressure or taking an extra clock for pipelining is okay in my book, as the sort of operations an AXI4-Lite interface is most suited for, at least in my opinion, doesn't require high throughput bursts. Sure, I could do this too, if I wanted, and I have done exactly this in the past, when I was first learning AXI, but the additional pipelining makes the code harder for others (future maintainers/developers) to get a handle on what is going on. Since, when I am done with a project, I don't want to have it come back and haunt me when I am working on another project, I determined that easy to understand code that can be clocked at a high rate is good even if there is backpressure and extra clocks for keeping combinatorial paths internal and reasonable in the context of timing closure.

 

I also added support of AxPROT bits and OKAY as well as SLVERR responses based on prot and writes to read only registers, well, because I believe more C programmers use pointers than understand how to use pointers safely.

 

My recommendation: Personally, barring any protocol violations I did not detect on the 2022.2 version of the code, I'd recommend going back to the 2022.2 code, and adding sample code for AxPROT, xRESP.

 

Or, for an even better experience, the ideas attempted in the 2024.2 code by AMD/Xilinx are good, specifically using readable state machines. But if you do go that route, fix the protocol violations, and use enumerated types instead of defined constant std_logic_vectors for your states. Using enumerated types helps in both readability and also by allowing tools to one hot encode states if necessary to meet timing

 

While we are at it, either using a riff on 2022.2 or 2024.2, add an used_in out_of_context property .xdc file for timing based synthesis in the create and package IP tool.

 

Regarding support for AxPROT and xRESP, providing example code should accompany comments that using such code may make troubleshooting in Vitis and/or using PS or PL DMA more difficult. Toward that end, the default should include a generic that turns off anything other than an OKAY response, with a nearby comment recommending the use of VLA and the handling of exceptions in the application.

 

In closing, these tools and wizards had so much potential. It is sad that way back when Xilinx did not spend more effort documenting support of an IP ecosystem, but even if they did, it might not have taken off as much as I would have hoped. With the new Vitis UNIFIED effort, hopefully this effort can be rekindled.

 

P..S. It is possible that the protocol violation of not generating BRESP when write data precedes write address may never occur. But it is a very time consuming task for end users to verify. We would need to test every processor under a variety of conditions, as well as every DMA (not that I think it is wise to use AXI4-Lite slaves with DMA masters--I know people sometimes have applications where they think this is a good idea.). And not only PS DMAs but also PL DMAs. As well as the AXI interconnect (RIP) and new smartConnect.

 

 

Processor System Design And AXI
Share
5 answers
287 views
Reto and drjohnsmith like this.

dgisselq (Member)

a year ago
Is the 2022.2 VHDL AXI-Lite slave the same as this one? If so, it needs modifications to be protocol compliant.

 

> But it is a very time consuming task for end users to verify

 

I think there's a bit of a confusion regarding how difficult the formal tools are to use. Send me a DM sometime, and I can show you how easy it is to get a trace demonstrating a protocol violation from one of these IPs. In general, it takes seconds--not minutes--to find AXI-Lite protocol bugs. Indeed, the last run to less than a second to complete. What takes and requires my time is 1) avoiding known bugs without changing the IP, and then 2) writing a blog article about it for everyone to see. That requires 3) taking screen snapshots, 4) annotating them, and 5) pointing out the bug in the design in the first place.

 

Yes, AXI takes a bit longer since the protocol is more complicated, but the first many bugs can be found and fixed very quickly.

 

Some more specific comments:

 

> I do not care about throughput on an AXI4-Lite interface, e.g., the ability of keeping all three write channels ?

> active on every clock with the relevant VALIDS and READYs. If I cared about that, I would use AXI4-full.

 

AXI-Lite uses less area, and is much easier to verify. If you couple an AXI-Lite peripheral with an full throughput AXI4-full to AXI4-Lite bridge, like this one, then you can get the full throughput of AXI4-full for the pain of AXI4-Lite.

 

> Or, for an even better experience, the ideas attempted in the 2024.2 code by AMD/Xilinx are good ...

 

You do realize there are multiple redundant registers in this new IP? For example, you don't need 2 bits for the read state that only has two potential states, nor do you need a separate state from the ARREADY signal ... but I could go on. Discovering these things is a natural process of the formal verification work.

 

Dan

Expand Post

OHF (Member)

a year ago
Hi Dan,

 

>I think there's a bit of a confusion regarding how difficult the formal tools are to use. 

 

End users don't have the code of PS processors/DMAs to do testing against the non-compliant AXI4-lite, let alone the time. Perhaps my point wasn't clear. It was actually discussed in the other post, and I figured you'd agree (actually, you sort of implied the point first)...namely, while it is hypothetically possible that the non-compliant AXI4-lite interface will never have any problem when mated with Xilinx IP in the IP catalog, to know that would require testing, and it would be far more efficient if the AXI4-Lite code produced by Xilinx was just compliant with the relevant specification.

 

>You do realize there are multiple redundant registers in this new IP?

 

By new, you mean 2024.2 I assume, and sure...though there is more than one way to implement read address/response and still have a compliant AXI4-lite interface (e.g., ready before valid or ready after valid--as you pointed out, same cycle combinatorial ready after valid violates the spec.).

 

Registers are cheap these days, and thousands will remain unused (but paid for) in the PL, so treating registers as though we're living in 1992 when you could get two registers for a dollar in 74 series, or slightly more in a OTP PLD, is often a penny wise pound foolish proposition today, so I am not so concerned about trimming registers if those registers help in some other tangible way (readability, meeting timing, less congestion, reduced power/heat, reduced area) unless the benefit of being register frugal is worth the co$t (in readability, solving timing problems, increasing congestion). Heck, the tools themselves will duplicate registers to help solve timing difficulties with the right settings. And I often want the tools to one hot encode my FSMs because I understand the benefit to not only timing, but also in generating efficient data enables (clock enables on DFFs in AMD/Xilinx world) on my datapath...and one hot encoding is even less efficient if you're counting registers. Indeed, one of my points was in this post and my last was that using enumerated types helps by allowing one hot...it also helps in readability, as well as visualization in VLA or Vivado simulator.

 

Worse than inefficient use of registers is: combinatorial output on read data. Combinatorial output on read data is silly, in my opinion, and should be avoided except for sound engineering reasons. Combinatorial outputs leads to timing closure challenges, especially if you have more than 2 or 4 registers. Retiming can fix that, but I prefer to follow a tried and true convention of registered outputs.

Expand Post

dgisselq (Member)

a year ago
> ... it would be far more efficient if the AXI4-Lite code produced by Xilinx was just compliant with the relevant specification.

 

Yes, we are agreed here.

 

I'm more concerned that Xilinx couldn't be bothered to do a better/proper job verifying their own IP.

 

> ... unless the benefit of being register frugal is worth the co$t (in readability, solving timing problems, increasing congestion).

 

You forget the benefit in reduced verification time.

 

One of the realities I deal with when working with induction in formal methods is that everything needs to be tied down. If it is a state that the IP cannot get into, such as when two (otherwise redundant) registers disagree, then I need to add an assertion for the tool to prove that the two registers are truly redundant. Hence, there is a cost--in verification time--to having redundant registers within an IP.

 

Dan

Expand Post

OHF (Member)

a year ago
Hi Dan, I get it, you're a big fan of formal verification, and I approve of your passion. Keep evangelizing! No one that got a bug free product to market ever thought, "Dam*, I wish I had left some bugs."


drjohnsmith (Member)

Edited April 23, 2025 at 5:56 AM
Yes yes . Why can't AMD get a axi interface through verification ?

 

As for formal verification , I get it. It's been taught since my MSc in the 80'.s..

Works, but keep pushing it , one day it will catch on

Imho ,things like ip blocks should state how and what verification they have passed , especially where there are expensive verification tools for axi available ,

I don't want to look into up blocks to verify , modify them , they should be just working and regression tested by the maker .

 